Dragon Age: The Veilguard faced a tough choice. Coming out a decade after 2014’s Inquisition, it could either stay true to the complexity of the series’ mechanics and risk feeling dated, or modernise itself enough to fit in and risk not feeling like Dragon Age. It opts for the latter, and is largely successful - but like everything in Dragon Age, it’s a decision that is not without consequence.

We can see the immediate evidence of this in combat - only two companions rather than three, only being able to control the player character, and an ability wheel with precious few companion skills to choose from. By that description, it probably sounds closer to a fantasy Mass Effect than a true Dragon Age experience. And it kind of is. But that’s kind of okay.

Dragon Age: The Veilguard Survives The Shift Into Power Wheel Combat
My main issue with the combat, rather than any complaints with the mechanical approach, is that the camera sucks. The gameplay is more hectic than you expect in Dragon Age, but the camera didn’t get the memo - as you leap around the battlefield, it often swings away from you, aiming up at the sky, or pushes in way too close. Locking on sometimes helps, but sometimes makes it worse. Nightmare will be extra nightmarish this time around.

But as far as the shift into action goes, Dragon Age feels oddly suited to it. Characters now each have unique item pools that upgrade (so a Fancy Name Broadsword +4 improves your Fancy Name Broadsword +3), each character has greater specialisation with elemental weaknesses now more important, and you quickly get used to their roles in the field. Every companion has five skills, but only enough slots for (and skill points to max out) three, so I tended to make a build and watch my team grow.

As the shift into action goes, Dragon Age feels oddly suited to it.

That was less the case with my Rook, though, as respeccing (so long as you stay in your original class) is both free and easy. I mainly played as a Saboteur Rogue, using gadgets and explosions, but tried my hand as a Duelist with necrotic stabs and a Veil Ranger archer. Though some will miss the technical minutiae, this streamlined approach encourages creativity from the player and stops the chore of passing gear down the line of less and less popular companions.

I still miss being able to control companions though. That one stings.

The Veilguard's Quest-Based Exploration Takes Some Getting Used To
Undoubtedly though, this makes for a more shallow gameplay approach. However, while the quests are more ‘mission based’ than roaming the open world (you know, like they are in Mass Effect), this change does not sacrifice depth. It’s a rough start - with too much exposition front loaded, early quests are too short and lack any substance. By the time I had to make my first major decision about which city to help, I wasn’t even sure which one was which.

But in time, these settings grow on you. The two most urban ones, Minrathous and Treviso, are an overcorrection into narrow streets with little freedom, and restricting Minrathous to Dock Town alone is a major misstep. But as you encounter settings with greater personality (the Necropolis is a personal favourite), the value of precise, meaningful visits shows its worth.

There are still quests dotted around the map, which vary in how involved they are, how much combat they feature, and whether they set off a chain of other quests. Thankfully though, there are no ocularums or other collectible filler to bloat these maps out. Each quest has a story to tell, and this is where Dragon Age shines - even if it’s not as bright as a certain other recent high fantasy RPG.

Companion Quests Are Well Written But Formulaic
This quest design is backed up by clever use of the companions. Throughout the game, all seven have a personal arc to complete, as is the way of things in squad-based RPGs. But these take three forms: Quests, Conversations, and Outings. The first is your standard quest like any other, but Conversations are longer, more interactive cutscenes, and Outings are basically walking simulators.

These offer solid variety and help you get to know the cast better - it’s a structure that makes use of a smaller cast, and gives them more to do in more meaningful ways that you never notice they have fewer numbers than Dragon Age is used to. They also each merge with the main quest at various points, so no one feels like a hanger on.

Some of these quests are the highlight of The Veilguard, especially the way Taash’s and Emmrich’s deepen the Dragon Age lore. But Neve’s especially ends anticlimactically, and the reliance on a similar structure (final battle that includes a significant character-defining decision) forces them into a rut. You can occasionally feel the writing being forced through the pipes of gameplay convention, rather than being given the freedom to flow and have everything else built around it.

So we come to the elephant in the room: these quests are not on the level of Baldur’s Gate 3. In a way, it’s a harsh comparison - Baldur’s Gate 3 is the current front runner for Game of the Decade, and that’s not a bar Dragon Age needs to be held to. But out here in the real world, they are both high fantasy roleplaying games built on character dynamics and witty banter - in a post-BG3 world, the cracks in The Veilguard’s formulaic arc finales begin to show.

Dragon Age: The Veilguard Doesn't Have Enough Solas
Speaking of cracks beginning to show, Dragon Age: The Veilguard never earns its decision to move on from Solas. Instead of spending the game focused on a character we know and respect, with clear motivations and nuance who leaves room to be redeemed, we instead spend the game caring about two evil gods who like being evil because they’re so evil. I say ‘caring’, but that’s the wrong word.

It feels like The Veilguard ducks away from the braver option in favour of a safer, more generic path. And that’s a real surprise as there are a lot of brave decisions here. I mentioned before about choosing a city? A whole arc, I’d guess five to ten hours or so of quests and exploration, is cut off depending on your choices. And no spoilers, but The Veilguard is bold in the impact of some late game decisions you can make.

Dragon Age: The Veilguard never earns its decision to move on from Solas

The benefit of having the game be about two distant and flat entities is that it’s actually about the good guys, rather than stopping the bad guys. Making use of the maps and the smaller cast, The Veilguard mostly has you dealing with the smaller, more human stories in the various factions. That’s slightly undercut by the world ending stakes, but it allows for some of the best written side quests and smaller narrative beats BioWare has ever produced.

Dragon Age: The Veilguard is a Dragon Age game like no other, and that alone will put some people off. But it brings with it the traditions of excellent character writing, strong world building through narrative quests, and offers the most exciting combat the series has ever seen. There is a stronger version of The Veilguard in here, one with more Solas and companion quests that find a more natural ending, but the one we’ve got is still a worthy successor to Dragon Age: Inquisition, and is a much needed return to form for BioWare.