There’s an oddity going on with the Assassin’s Creed series, and it’s something that I noted back in my review of Mirage when that came out in 2023. Basically, the series went into becoming a full-on action RPG with a fully customizable protagonist who could, if you so desired, do very little assassination in the traditional sense. Which was fun, but it also was perhaps not exactly what people expected from the franchise… resulting in a pull backwards, an effort to split the difference, and Assassin’s Creed: Shadows as the next mainline entry trying to strike a balance between its older character-driven affairs and the more expansive RPG elements.It’d be a tricky balance to pull off no matter what, but Shadows is also a game taking aim at something big by setting itself against the backdrop of Oda Nobunaga’s conquests in Japan and giving you an actual historical protagonist to play in the form of Yasuke (a real person, albeit one shrouded in some degree of uncertainty). It’s also decidedly not a DLC that grew into being its own independent game, which means it can really start and develop as an open-world title in its own right. So is Shadows as good as its predecessors? Is it fun? Does it deserve the hype, and is it a much-needed win for Ubisoft as a company?Well… it’s complicated. But that’s what a review is for, right? (And for the record, I played the PlayStation 5 version for the review.)Vengeance is Like a ForestThe odd thing about how Shadows is structured comes from its plot, which starts by introducing us to Yasuke… who is not the protagonist. He is the deuteragonist. Naoe is our protagonist, but she only gets introduced a fair bit after Yasuke does. We meet Yasuke as a slave of Portugese traders who acquires the interest of Oda Nobunaga, a historical figure who serves as an all-purpose Bad Guy in a lot of Japanese media, and we see how he catches the man’s interest… but then soon after our perspective shifts to Naoe, a shinobi of the Iga region, who suffers a personal tragedy fairly early and is put on a path of vengeance as a result.While the idea of having the assassins as actual ninja is such an obvious lift that the original Assassin’s Creeds were basically about making ninja where ninja did not exist, one of the things I really like about the game’s plot is that early on it very much eschews any connection to the larger metaplot. Naoe’s goals really do not intersect with those of a larger order. It’s clear that she has ties to it that she is not fully aware of, but that’s not what motivates her and it isn’t her priority.Unfortunately… what kind of hurts the plot somewhat is both that it does eventually have to tie back into the metaplot of the series and that the new way of doing so feels really obtrusive. I’ve always been of the mind that the overarching narrative between games has been a drag for Assassin’s Creed for some time, and this game tries to avoid putting you into a specific person’s shoes… but that just makes the sudden leaps into “hey, this is a simulation of historical memories” much less appealing.In other words, I really found myself enjoying the plot when it was a sprawling ninja revenge story, and that part is really fun. Naoe has an interesting energy as a protagonist – she’s confident in what she has to do, but also aware of the gaps in her own experience and not fully confident in all of the choices she has to make along the way. Yasuke feels a bit more stoic and wooden, but he’s still a fun character, and like most games in the series the supporting cast runs the gamut between “bland historical archetype” and “kinda fun weirdo.” But every time you have to be reminded that you’re playing Assassin’s Creed it gets a bit tedious.The Woodman’s Axe Falls But OnceSo the real meat of this game is going to be hopping around Japan shivving random people in the neck, and it’s here that the split of protagonists makes a certain amount of sense. See, for the most RPG-ish installments of the game, you could choose very early on to be Mr. or Mrs. “Stealth is achieved by rushing in and killing everyone so you leave no witnesses” and thus never engaging with the game’s assassination side at all. And Shadows will absolutely let you play that way… but first you’re going to have to go through story with Naoe, who does not play that way. Naoe sneaks around and acts like a proper ninja. Yasuke kicks down doors and smashes heads in.That’s not to say that Yasuke is incapable of any level of stealth or that Naoe cannot engage in combat; it’s just that they are characters geared toward different approaches. I appreciate that. You can focus on one or the other if you prefer a particular style, or you can swap based on specific challenges. All of the above works.Combat, assassination, and most of the other mechanics will be very familiar if you’ve played these games before. Enemies will detect noises or respond if they see you, there are places to hide and roofs to parkour across, you have access to some ranged options and tools to distract or disable your foes. Both characters can also use a small array of different weapons, each of which has their own advantages, drawbacks, and special moves in battle. It works quite well, although I did find the parry timing sometimes seemed weirdly laggy to me.What is newer to the game is using scouts. Rather than having your next objective just pop up on the map, often you will be simply given vague directions (such as “the target is in the northern reaches of Iga”). You can either head into the region and hope to stumble across it, or you can deploy scouts to the region to fill in part of the map and narrow down your search for your next objective.It’s a neat idea, but especially early in the game it feels very limited, since you have a very small number of scouts and the tutorial doesn’t explain how to deploy them very well. And it ultimately results in what I think is the weakest part of the game as a whole, which is that it makes it harder than ever to just play the game in anything approaching a straightforward fashion.Obviously, the nice thing about open-world games is that you really can choose to just faff around raiding bandit strongholds and nabbing treasures for a long time if you want to. But the lack of guidance on sometimes important quests means that you can easily be waiting for your scouts to come back in order to figure out where you’re going, and during that time you have to just go do side activities. If you don’t want to? Tough luck. I definitely understand pointing out to players that they are not supposed to just bum-rush the story, but forcing you to stop dead in your tracks is not exactly a better state of affairs.In fact, once again, I kept feeling like I would enjoy the game more if it were less Assassin’s Creed. I really want to enjoy this basic game, but the need to give me cities full of people who mostly aren’t doing anything is to the detriment of the fun parts of the game. It’s a weird sensation. It’s not that the game is bad, but I found myself often wishing that it would get out of its own way.Perfect BlossomsGraphically, the game is both gorgeous and suffers from the problem a lot of more modern games in the series does. It’s a very visually faithful recreation of historical Japan, but in pursuit of that fidelity nothing pops as much as it should visually, so important details only stand out when you see little icons for interaction hovering over them. That is perhaps understandable but it still isn’t ideal.The changing seasons are particularly nice, as you get to experience the full spectrum of weather and it does definitely make Japan feel more lived-in. I greatly appreciated the visual touches when the seasons changed, especially as they felt genre-appropriate.Voice acting, as you might expect, is outstanding; characters tend to have reserved readings, but they are reserved readings due to a naturalistic performance style, and I definitely think that Naoe in particular must have been a difficult role her actress consistently delivers on. I also appreciate that while some games in the franchise suffer from inconsistent pronunciation of various terms outside of English, this felt mercifully free of that; people are saying their Japanese correctly to my ears. (I don’t speak Japanese, so maybe I’m totally wrong, but at least it’s consistent even if it’s wrong.)Hire a SamuraiThrough most of Assassin’s Creed: Shadows I really did feel a sense of… not exhaustion but a sense that the game was being held back. It’s not the Shadows part, but the Assassin’s Creed part that feels superfluous. Yes, I realize that the branding is a big part of why it exists at all, but I kept feeling like a more tightly focused game that was just about these two characters and had less hunting for fast travel spots or hideout building resources would be a more fun game as a whole.However… I don’t think that makes the game bad. It means that you do have to accept some compromises with it. There are things that I feel are held back unfairly. Yet at the end of the day, every time I found myself annoyed with it, I had reason to dive back in. I may have groaned a bit more often than I wanted at the game, but at least some of those groans were because I wanted the game to go back to the part I found the most fun.And that’s really the ultimate takeaway. It has a load of really fun parts, a fun gameplay loop, an engaging story, and an earnest effort to split the difference between the various elements of the franchise history. It’s a good game! Take these reservations not as a subversion of that fact, but for what they are: Acknowledgement of its limitations.Plus, y’know, it’s a game about a real historical samurai who was pretty awesome, so you have to admit that part kinda rules. Review copy provided by Ubisoft for PS5. All screenshots courtesy of Ubisoft. 