After Assassin’s Creed Mirage took the series back to its roots, both in setting and style, Assassin’s Creed Shadows represents what is presumably the future of the franchise. Like Origins, Odyssey and Valhalla, it’s an epic action-RPG with an open world so vast you can truly get lost in it. But there are elements here that make it feel more identifiable as an Assassin’s Creed game, and overall it’s an engrossing spectacle.Set in 16th century Japan, Assassin’s Creed Shadows features two protagonists: a brutal samurai named Yasuke, and a deadly ninja called Naoe. This setup effectively allows players to choose take a more stealthy approach or face tasks more head-on. It takes a while until players are able to switch between the two at will, however, with you needing to play through their own stories until destiny unites them.Playing as Yasuke, Assassin’s Creed Shadows feels like a character action game at times, with set pieces that see you moving through areas while facing off a large number of foes. And thanks to Yasuke’s large frame, you’re more than capable of dealing with them. He can make use of a wide range of weapons, from melee instruments of death such as long katanas and naginatas, to ranged options which include a basic rifle and a bow and arrow.Over time, you can develop Yasuke’s skills with any of these weapons, learning useful skills and gaining powerful perks. His large build already comes in handy to knock down wooden doors by charging at them, for example, but by developing this skill you can even use it to knock back and damage enemies even larger than you. And while they won’t be for the squeamish, Yaskuke’s brutal finishers will have some players howling with delight.As much fun as it is to play as Yasuke, however, chances are you’ll spend most of your time in Assassin’s Creed Shadows playing as Naoe. While she’s not as powerful as Yasuke in open combat, she can still hold her own whether she’s equipped with a katana, tanto or kusarigama. But it’s her capabilities outside of combat that will gravitate you towards her time and time again. Stealth in general has been given a major overhaul in Assassin’s Creed Shadows, finally allowing both Yasuke and Naoe to actually make use of the darkness to remain unseen, as well as go prone in order to hide in grass and make use of crawl spaces. But Naoe’s agility in addition to her grappling hook opens up additional options.While you can’t simply assassinate every target here — at least not without putting some points into Naoe’s Assassin skill tree — she’s your go-to if you want to make your way through areas unseen while landing clean kills. And thanks to her grappling hook, she has additional places to hide and can quickly scale tall buildings to get out of harm’s way and survey an area. When it comes to activating those Eagle points dotted around the map, you’ll also find that Yasuke sometimes simply can’t access them. And that’s a pain, as you’ll want to unlock as many as you can to make it easier to fast-travel around this game’s humongous map.It is easy to switch between Yasuke and Naoe, though. As long as you’re out of combat, you can pretty much do it anywhere just by opening the in-game menu and holding a button for a second or so — you’ll just have to sit through a small loading screen. You can also change when fast-travelling, and you’ll be frequently asked who you want to play as when starting selected missions. It’s just a shame that Yasuke’s limited tools and mobility means exploring the open world as him just isn’t that much fun or rewarding.And what a world Ubisoft has created for Assassin’s Creed Shadows. Picturesque doesn’t quite do it justice. It is simply stunning to inhabit, absolutely packed with colour and detail. Whether you’re out exploring the wilderness, making your way to a new area to continue your hunt for the people that have wronged you, or searching around a town for a contact, chances are your jaw will frequently be hitting the floor. Thanks to to realistic weather effects and fantastic sound design, it’s easy to get well and truly immersed.The map is so expansive that it can feel a little bit lonely going off the beaten path at times, though. And while there are a wide variety of quests and activities to tackle here, mostly in a non-linear format, you might tire of killing samurai daisho in order to clear castles and obtain their prized loot, as well as scouring temples to find hidden scrolls or shrines to pray at. Doing both is pretty much vital if you want to develop your characters, thanks to the Mastery and Knowledge points they provide.These are about the only qualms I have with Assassin’s Creed Shadows, however, and it’s otherwise quite simply a delight. Yasuke and Naoe are both likable protagonists, and you’ll want to delve into their personal stories as you move through the game’s grander narrative. And both the stealth and combat are the best they’ve ever been in an Assassin’s Creed game by far, giving you more options than ever when it comes to completing objectives and assassinating targets.Other features here only serve to make Assassin’s Creed Shadows even more dynamic and enjoyable, such as changing seasons which realistically alters your surroundings, and a Hideout system that allows you to build and upgrade various rooms, expanding its facilities. Ultimately, it’s the type of game that sucks you in and holds you like a vice, offering tens of hours of assassination action even if you’re focused on just completing the main story.Is Assassin’s Creed Shadows the best Assassin’s Creed game yet? Some might feel that way, for sure. It’s certainly up there with the best the series has to offer, alongside the likes of Assassin’s Creed 2 and Origins. In any case, most will be happy to hear that it successfully marries the extended freedom and scope of newer titles in the series with the stealth-focused gameplay of old, especially when playing as Naoe. And so, whether you’re a fan of the series or simply like the idea of exploring feudal Japan, eradicating wrongdoers as either a samurai or a ninja, consider Assassin’s Creed Shadows a must-play.Assassin's Creed Shadows Review  With its two playable characters allowing you to tackle scenarios head-on or with a more stealthy approach, Assassin's Creed Shadows gives you more options than ever before when it comes to completing objectives. And while it has some minor issues, like it simply not being all that fun to explore its open world as Yasuke,  it's up there with the best entries in the series thanks to its thrilling gameplay, engaging story and immersive world.9out of 10 We like…Looks absolutely stunningStory will have you hooked from the get-goGreat combat systemImproved stealthWe don’t like…Some activities can be a little repetitiveNaoe's agility and tools make exploring the open world as Yasuke redundant  This review of Assassin’s Creed Shadows is based on the PS5 version, with a code provided by the game’s publisher.