When a prime minister gets drawn into a controversy about an upcoming game, you can imagine the stakes are high.
Set in 15th-century Japan, Ubisoft’s latest instalment of the Assassin’s Creed saga had already weathered several storms, from the historical authenticity of one protagonist to a string of delays. The publisher also endured a rough year thanks to a succession of layoffs and a high-profile flop in Star Wars Outlaws. It badly needs Shadows to be a success.

So company executives must have cringed last week when a Japanese politician complained about the depiction of some shrines within the game, leading Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba to muse on the need for respect for religious sites. Ubisoft has since patched the potentially problematic areas and will hope to avoid any further banana skins.

Still, you’ve got to admire the chutzpah with which the publisher has approached this deeply researched samurai saga. Ubi has taken a string of courageous decisions, all the while knowing they may not be an easy sell.

The developers have changed several conventions we’ve come to expect from Assassin’s Creed. The game teases the possibility of two main characters, then withholds one of them for many hours. In the optional immersive mode, it makes you work hard to locate each next objective, forcing you to rely on rumour, guesswork and old-fashioned scouting instead of glowing quest markers.


Little wonder then that last month Ubisoft offered reviewers the chance to dive into the depths of Shadows a full three weeks before release date. This is a slow-burner, a deliberately unhurried tangle of story threads in which resistance builds to a diabolical warlord ravaging feudal Japan.

It starts with a chronicle of revenge by orphaned peasant girl Naoe, a featherweight warrior who’s deadly with a blade and incredibly agile. For 12 to 15 hours, we follow her story until a somewhat unearned twist puts her on the same side as giant samurai Yasuke. This détente brings the lengthy prologue to a close and kicks off the duo’s main mission to slay a secret society of agitators.

Ubi ekes much mileage from the contrast between the two allies, enabling you to switch between either one at will. While Naoe moves quickly and stealthily, she’s easily outnumbered. Yasuke moves like a tank, skittling enemies with a swipe and bursting through scenery. But he’s noticeably sluggish and frankly a bit rubbish at the signature climbing moves of Assassin’s Creed.

Of course, Shadows still has much in common with its predecessors, usually involving a loner waging death across a sprawling landscape. Familiar elements abound such as towers to be climbed, loot to be collected, skills to be upgraded and bandits to be slain. You have the respect the volume of activities, systems and sights to be seen. But you must also wonder how sustainable this type of mission bloat is for game development in the long term.

The two leads make for charismatic avatars, differing wildly in their combat styles and thus lessening the possibility the player will tire of the formula that underpins the gameplay for long periods.

We have not been short of sumptuous hack’n’slash blockbusters set in Japan’s beautiful countryside – from 2020’s Ghost of Tsushima to last year’s Rise of the Ronin. But Shadows somehow edges them in its synthesis of ancient Japanese culture. For sheer spectacle alone, it rarely flags, treating the player to an endless stream of exquisite tableaux, from majestic castles to bustling towns to imposing mountains and forest.