‘Assassin’s Creed Shadows’ review: a bold new era starts here

Two very different protagonists and a fresh Japanese setting make for a near-perfect adventure

When Assassin’s Creed’s viking sequel Valhalla came out in 2020, it was obvious to everyone that the series of historical adventure games needed a revamp. Two-hundred million copies sold isn’t to be sniffed at but the tried-and-tested formula had started to feel tired. Instead of meaningful improvements, Valhalla merely added more pointless tasks.

Some progress was made with 2023’s Mirage, a more focussed, small-scale adventure in ninth-century Baghdad, but latest game Shadows is the real deal – triumphantly bringing the 18-year-old franchise into an exciting new era with strong characters and more dynamic gameplay.
Advertisement Set in 16th-century Japan, Shadows follows the journey of a female shinobi (a ninja) called Naoe and an African servant turned samurai named Yasuke, who is brought to Japan by an Italian missionary. These two protagonists form the core of Shadows’ story, which is about working together to achieve a larger goal – no matter what you look like, where you’re from or what you’ve faced.
Throughout the initial 10 or so hours as Naoe, you’ll learn about Japanese history and take part in traditions from the time period. These include Kuji-kiri, a form of deep meditation, and Sumi-e ink paintings. It’s all handled respectfully and showcases the culture of the period in a way the franchise hasn’t really attempted before. For the most part, Shadows isn’t concerned with the grand plans and global organisations which consume the more personal stories of previous games. Instead, you’re able to soak up every lush aspect of feudal Japan.

Tongayi Chirisa (Yasuke) and Masumi Tsunoda (Naoe) help sell the game’s history, narrative and culture through their elegant performances, which are married to some excellent writing. The support cast also contribute to what is one of the best narratives in an Assassin’s Creed game.
After an initial set-up period, you get access to your hideout – a plot of land, which acts as a base for your crew known as The League. While playing, you will build up your hideout, unlocking different buildings which in turn unlock new features such as the ability to engrave perks on your weapons, which grant passive bonuses. It acts like a small citybuilder, with customisation options, bespoke building placements and even decorations. It’s complex enough to feel like a central part of the game, rather than a needless add-on which does nothing but force you to spend more time in the world of Shadows.

Once you’re up and running, you’ll be able to switch freely between Yasuke and Naoe, with each character able to complete individual quests and take on chunkier main missions. Naoe is a typical Assassin’s Creed protagonist, sneaking around buildings and climbing in and out of hay piles. Yasuke is more like Kratos from God Of War – a huge, imposing figure with powerful attacks who can kill groups of enemies with a single swipe of his spear. These distinct play-styles offer a lot of flexibility in how you approach the game’s various quests. Everything is built to accommodate both characters but switching between them gives every mission a fresh twist.
‘Assassin’s Creed Shadows’. CREDIT: Ubisoft
No matter who you choose, there’s a visually stunning world to explore across four distinct seasons. This is the best-looking Assassin’s Creed game and a lot of work has gone into bringing Japan’s Sengoku period to life faithfully.
Delays have plagued Shadows’ development with its release date pushed back repeatedly – but it’s worth the wait. An incredibly well-put-together and expertly designed experience, this is one of the greatest Assassin’s Creed games yet.
Advertisement ‘Assassin’s Creed Shadows’ is out March 20 for PlayStation, Xbox and PC

Assassin’s Creed Shadows is the series refresh badly needed after Valhalla, showcasing a huge technical and visual upgrade alongside a new gameplay blueprint. A fantastic story and well-developed characters ground the game in a believable era of Japan that is fun to explore. It confidently sets the standard for the next games in the franchise.

Strong plot, excellent characters and amazing performances
Gorgeous visuals and impressive world design
Flexible gameplay, with two distinct play-styles as Naoe and Yasuke

Objective board is slightly complicated to navigate