After a short delay, Assassin’s Creed Shadows is here to emerge fans in a world they’ve been expecting for many years: Feudal Japan. The successor to 2023’s Assassin’s Creed Mirage, Shadows does something that no other titles in the series have done before: it allows fans to play with two rather than just one character.
Assassin’s Creed Shadows tells of the story of a shinobi assassin, Naoe, and a samurai, Yasuke, in a time of extreme political turbulence. The way the game is structured allows players to taste both sides of the story, as they will take control of both Naoe and Yasuke at different moments of the plot.
It’s a bold approach that has been done before in games, but not by the Assassin’s Creed series if you don’t count the scripted moments from the previous installments in the series. However, while the mechanic is new for the franchise and the execution is rather decent, I always had the feeling that I’m playing two different games whenever I switched characters.
In my book, Naoe, the ultimate shinobi assassin, is the way to play Assassin’s Creed Shadows. Yasuke, the black samurai, feels and plays like a juggernaut who squashes his enemies with a simple swing of the sword. The guy is not just a force of nature, but he’s nearly unkillable.

Yasuke seems like a character from another franchise that’s been artificially transplanted into the world of Assassin’s Creed. It’s the type of character who shoots first and asks questions later. In a game that heavily relies on stealth and assassinations, a Rambo-type of character is really odd.
Overall, Yasuke is a well-written character with a decent story who gets surpassed by Naoe in about every aspect. In the end, it’s what playstyle you like more: a stealth or guns blazing approach.
After spending dozens of hours with the game, I can safely say that Naoe is by far the main star of the Assassin’s Creed Shadows. She not only perfectly fits the scenario, but also the pedigree of the Assassin’s Creed series.
Trained in becoming a deadly assassin by her father, Naoe begins her journey of discovery and revenge with just a traditional katana and basic knowledge about the art of being a shinobi.
You’ll spend the first 10 hours (at least) playing as Naoe, get to know her better and understand her motivations. Ubisoft is going hard with the exposition of her story, as there are numerous cutscenes in the first few hours of the game.
Naoe’s gameplay style perfectly fits the Assassin’s Creed franchise, but she’s also a very genuine character. Her journey from being a wannabe shinobi to a ruthless killer is very interesting to experience, even if the game’s story is nothing to be excited about.
One of the game’s main RPG mechanics, the skill tree, is also its weakest point. Every time Naoe and Yasuke level up, they can use a mastery point in one of the six skill trees that are meant to influence the way you play the character or at least improve them in certain aspects.
I can’t say that I felt more powerful putting one point in Naoe’s katana skill tree that increased her damage with this specific weapon by 2 or 4 percent. Especially in a game that doesn’t tell you how much HP an enemy has or how much damage you do with a weapon.
The entire skill tree of both characters feels like a trick meant to induce the idea that the RPG aspect matters, whereas in much of these so-called improvements aren’t meaningful for your playstyle until you start using engravings.

Engravings become available much later in the game and can be used to empower your weapons. They really influence a character’s playstyle and it’s one of the things that I liked most in Assassin’s Creed Shadows.
Just like every other Assassin’s Creed game in the last few years, the world of Shadows is huge. Searching every nook and cranny for loot will take quite a while if you’re a completionist, but there’s a catch.
Not everything will appear on the map even if you scout the area from the traditional viewpoints, unless you specifically enable this feature at the beginning of the game. There’s no Eagle to help you scout an area, so once you climb a viewpoint, you’ll have the option to Observe the area and tag any point of interest you find.
From my experience, this feature has been terribly implemented, as you’ll have to pinpoint the cursor while in Freeaim mode right above the POI, otherwise you won’t be able to tag it.
It’s a frustrating experience that can be skipped by simply enabling the option to show everything on the map once you scout an area from a viewpoint. Unless you want to pay $10 and get the special add-on from the game’s virtual, which will show everything on the map.
The combat has suffered some changes from the previous installments in the series, but that doesn’t mean it’s better. Ubisoft has tried a more soulslike approach where commands like parry and dodge give you some bonuses executed correctly.
Every time you manage to parry or dodge an enemy, you live them “vulnerable” to your attacks for a little while. This means that you do more damage for a brief period. Is it worth trying to parry an enemy to get this bonus? Absolutely not. You can simply dodge all the enemy’s attacks and be just as successful.
But combat has never been the strong point of an Assassin’s Creed game, so I’m happy to report that the stealth and assassination mechanics are extremely satisfying and the best parts when it comes to combat.
Trying to find a way to stealthily infiltrate a stronghold and doing it without being spotted feels extremely rewarded. But if that’s not how you approach things, Naoe can be as apt at combat as Yasuke when she needs to be, especially if you invest heavily in specific skill trees.
Story-wise, Assassin’s Creed Shadows is serviceable, and I’ll just leave it at that since I don’t want to spoil anything. I especially appreciated the different tones of Naoe and Yasuke’s stories, but I can’t help the feeling that the former is much more flesh out than the latter.

Impressive visuals, expansive open-worldNaoe is an interesting characterStealth, assassination mechanics are very satisfying

Story is all over the placeBase building feels forcedCombat is a hit and missRPG elements don’t matter

Assassin’s Creed Shadows is definitely an evolutionary rather than a revolutionary installment in the series. Every mechanic from the previous games has been polished, refined to make more sense, but there’s really nothing new that would radically change anything for the better.
I don’t think the extra year that Ubisoft used to make the game was worth it since Shadows isn’t much different than Valhalla, Origins, or Mirage. Yes, it’s much more polished and looks a lot better visually, but it doesn’t bring back the gameplay and mystery of the first games in the series.
Overall, I had a great time with Assassin’s Creed Shadows, but that’s because I’m a fan of the series. I have doubts that a newcomer to the series will find it equally interesting, especially since the overarching story is just serviceable.
Review key provided by the publisher.