Since the dawn of time - or thereabouts - when Ubisoft Montreal started experimenting with different eras in history for Assassin’s Creed, fans have been pleading for an instalment set in Feudal Japan. Probably to fill the void that games like Tenchu used to fill. Well, here we are, nearly eighteen years since the first Assassin’s Creed launched, and that wish has become a reality. Assassin’s Creed Shadows is the game we’ve all been pining for, but with the brilliant Ghost of Tsushima dropping a few years ago (essentially beating Assassin’s Creed at its own game in its own authentic Japanese setting), is it too little, too late?

Taking place in 1581, during the Sengoku period, Assassin’s Creed Shadows sees Japan continue to reunite under Oda Nobunaga. In it you play as Naoe, a fleet-footed shinobi; and Yasuke, a tank of samurai - who is actually based on the real-life Yasuke, who served under Nobunaga between 1581 and 1582. Shadows tells the story - as it always has done - of a rising faction of dastardly and downright evil actors who put their own visions of power and ambition ahead of the needs of the common folk. As such, Naoe and Yasuke must band together to take down the 12 Shinbakufu, aka the embodiment of evil. Or are they?

Shadows weaves a pretty standard Assassin’s Creed story in general, as you make your way from region to region taking down a hitlist of sorts, but where the game excels is in its storytelling. Both Naoe and Yasuke’s histories and ambitions, which are often at odds with one another, all play out in front of your eyes as they recruit players for their League and topple despots at every turn.

While Shadows’ storytelling and narrative beats are some of the best in the series, the game’s pacing does stutter in places. While the start is fairly glacial, the shift in tone from Act 2 into Act 3 is a touch jarring. The best narratives comprise perfectly pitched peaks and troughs, but Shadows occasionally fails to deliver on those big story moments. Other than that, Shadows is a thoroughly enjoyable and emotional affair, with plenty of mystery, treachery, and bravado thrown in for good measure.

Sure, developer Ubisoft Quebec has made a big deal of the dynamism that comes with being able to switch between its two protagonists whenever you like, but we honestly wanted to solely play as Naoe. For the most part, you’re perfectly welcome to do that - aside from some very specific character threads towards the end of the game, and the odd side mission here and there. Heck, some main quests instead of allowing you to choose, actually let you play from both perspectives. But, for the most part, the target takedown quests can differ greatly from Naoe to Yasuke.

Gameplay-wise, Naoe is your stealthy shinobi, sticking to the shadows, manipulating light sources, and gracefully, nimbly gliding across the rooftops. Conversely, Yasuke is slow and cumbersome, but incredibly powerful. Both are genuinely fun and acceptable ways to play the game. In fact, despite being an ardent stealth fan, being made to play Yasuke for some personal quests at the end proved genuinely enjoyable. Instead of sticking to the shadows and taking foes out silently, we waded into castles and swung our katana at anything that moved. Our only complaint about this aspect is that certain collectibles have been tucked away in castles that only Yasuke can access, meaning we had to exit the area and return with the samurai to pick them up. That genuinely makes no sense, as it’s contrary to Ubisoft’s mission statement, of allowing you to choose which character you want to play as at all times.

That aside, Shadows’ gameplay is incredibly satisfying on both fronts: shinobi and samurai. In fact, with Naoe’s parkour, her skills and versatile tools on offer, it’s as close to a Tenchu game we’ve come in twenty-odd years. It’s so, so satisfying! Yasuke, on the other hand, while incredibly fun, we found made the game remarkably easy. Playing with Yasuke feels like dropping the difficulty down a level. During our 60-or so hours with the game, we probably spent a good 58 of those with Naoe, and it was barrels of fun.

With Shadows, Ubisoft Quebec seems to have gone for quality over quantity. Sure, there are viewpoints to scale, but there’s certainly less ‘filler’ content than we’ve seen in other recent Assassin’s Creed entries. Instead, and I’m not sure whether this is good or bad, there are a ridiculous amount of targets to take down - beyond the aforementioned twelve. I’d argue there are almost too many! Outside of that, from a gameplay standpoint, it’s not all too dissimilar from Assasin’s Creed Valhalla. That is except, of course, the ability to build and customise your own hideout, employ scouts and recruit allies,  which you can call into action whenever you’re in a bind. All of these are fine additions, but don’t really amount to much, in the grand scheme of things.

What is a game changer, though, is that Assassin’s Creed Shadows introduces seasons. These aren’t artificial seasons that are dictated by the story, either. The seasons in Shadows are basically on a normal time cycle. That means that the seasons drastically change the look and feel of environments, creating moments of pure magic. For instance, Kyoto with the spring sakura bloom is wildly different to Kyoto in the middle of winter, with snow blanketing the temples and mountains. During our 60-plus hours, we saw the whole gamut of weather and seasonal effects. Torrential rain, snowstorms, misty mornings, thunderstorms, blazing hot sunshine, cloudy days - Shadows has it all. Granted, Ubisoft Quebec’s version of Japan is as stunning as it is, but seeing it go through all four different seasons is fantastic, and something we hope becomes a staple for the series moving forward.

What’s safe to say with Shadows, is that it continues the series’ shift since Origins moved into RPG territory. Gone are the days of blending with crowds, staying out of sight, and scaling large buildings to scout. Now, Assassin’s Creed is all about enormous sandboxes with plenty of ways to tackle whatever situation is thrown at you; and with two styles of play on offer, Shadows does that more than all the other Assassin’s Creeds put together.

Boasting some truly satisfying stealth gameplay - and action if you want it - Shadows also tells a cracking story, and while it does falter at times, Ubisoft Quebec certainly keeps things interesting throughout. I wouldn’t go as far as to say Shadows is as good as Assassin’s Creed Odyssey, but it’s a damn sight better than Origins and Valhalla, as far as I’m concerned. And it’s also about as competent a stealth game as we’ve seen in a lot of years.

The way to play Shadows is in Japanese with subtitles, but if you’re opting for the English dub, the acting and VO is pretty great, too. The music, however, is where the game excels. The experimental and often offbeat take on classical Japanese music works well. It shouldn’t, but it really does.

Open-world Japan is absolutely gorgeous, and Ubisoft is clearly getting better at facial animation and choreography too. My only gripe is with the frame rate when you’re visiting your hideout. It’s not quite best-in-class yet for Ubisoft, but it’s definitely evolving.

Whether you opt for Naoe or Yasuke, both are genuinely fun and viable ways to play the game... Naoe especially. I like to think I’m pretty well-versed in stealth games, so let me tell you: Shadows’ stealth is sublime. Sub. Lime.

Japan as an open-world is sensational, but instead of opting for a dearth of variety in content, Ubisoft Quebec essentially gives you 100 targets to assassinate instead. On top of that, the story does falter a few times and fails to deliver on the execution. To be honest, feudal Japan is just a fantastic sandbox to explore on its own. And those seasons? Excellent!

Shadows’ achievements are standard fare, in truth. Thankfully there’s nothing missable, but there’s not a lot of creativity on show either. And no, doing Overdesigned III does not count as creativity.